Add "How to write documentation" page from intranet (#83)
giantswarm/handbook: content/docs/product/docs/_index.md

---
title: How to write documentation
linkTitle: Documentation
weight: 5
description: >
  This section explains how to document functions of our product for our end users.
---

In this section you learn how to add to and maintain the documentation for our product. We assume here that you are part of a product team or a SIG and want to maintain the content your team/SIG is responsible for.

## Public by default

When we talk about documentation here, we talk about everything under our public documentation site, which is [docs.giantswarm.io](https://docs.giantswarm.io/).

> Our goal is to have all documentation for our product be available via that site. This is towards the mission that every question should be answerable by a link to the appropriate document.

Reviewer: Answering questions with links is 🤌❤️

## Responsibilities

Our responsibilities for public documentation are layered.

> - Ownership for content is assigned **according to team or SIG responsibilities**. For example, Team Horizon "owns" articles related to [Developer Platform Overview](https://github.com/giantswarm/docs/blob/main/src/content/platform-overview/_index.md) as you can see the front matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ownership for content is assigned **according to team or SIG responsibilities**. For example, Team Horizon "owns" articles related to [Developer Platform Overview](https://github.com/giantswarm/docs/blob/main/src/content/platform-overview/_index.md) as you can see on the front matter (defined by the YAML header fields).
```

- [SIG Docs]({{< relref "/docs/organizational-structure/sigs/docs/_index.md" >}}) is responsible for overall content coherence and consistency.

- [SIG User Experience]({{< relref "/docs/organizational-structure/sigs/ux/_index.md" >}}) (UX) takes responsibility for the overall UI and user experience, having the docs site online and available, have a user-friendly search etc.

## Editing content

In general, modifying content works as follows:

The [giantswarm/docs](https://github.com/giantswarm/docs) repository is where all the documentation content lives. To modify content, clone that repository, create a branch, provide a pull request (PR).

> **Note:** You can [run the docs site locally](https://handbook.giantswarm.io/docs/product/docs/docs-dev/) to preview your changes.

Reviewer: Dead link. And shouldn't we rather link to `docs/README.md`?

Author: yeah this will be available soon, needs to be migrated

### Reviews

For pull requests, **seek an agreement and approval within your team first**. Then feel free to ask SIG Docs for approval, too. Asking SIG Docs for review is recommended, but optional. It might help to keep coherence throughout our documentation, which is maintained by lots of different people.

### Publishing is automatic

Once a pull request in the giantswarm/docs repository gets merged, the changes get published.

> (Under the hood, a new release is created using GitHub actions, immediately after the merge. Then, up to 10 minutes later, the release gets published via the `app-updater-app` on `gollum`. The app for serving `docs.giantswarm.io` lives in workload cluster `c68pn` on `gollum` installation, in the `docs` namespace.)

In the unlikely case that you don't want your changes to be released immediately (e. g. because you want to craft a release manually), simply add

```nohighlight
do not release
```

to your final commit message when merging.

### When to merge a docs PR

Changes to the docs content should be merged as soon as the content is relevant for users.

> If a PR adds content for a new function that is not yet available to users, the docs pull request **should not be merged**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a PR adds content for a new function that is not yet available to users, the docs pull request **should not be merged** and therefore remain marked as draft while it is not ready.
```

- Be consistent in language and layout.
- Feel free to use contractions - e.g. you'll, we've. etc.

When in doubt, read your writing aloud - if it's hard to hear, the tone is too stiff.

### Formatting

- Titles and headers use standard sentence capitalization. In headers and text, capitalize proper names of products, features, and tools.
- Organize article content with H2s and H3s. Use H2s for higher-level topics or goals and use H3s within each section for supporting information or tasks.
- Only use ordered lists for step-by-step instructions.
- Use unordered lists to display examples or multiple notes. If an unordered list is longer than 10 items, use a table instead.
- When using and acronym/abbreviation, use the long form first and then the the acronym form in parentheses, to introduce the acronym.

### Code blocks and syntax highlighting

**Guideline:** For code blocks, we give language hints to ensure proper syntax highlighting.

A YAML block, for example, is opened with triple back-ticks followed by `yaml`:

~~~markdown
```yaml
foo: bar
```
~~~

**Guideline:** Shell commands and their output get the fake hint `nohighlight` to prevent any funky syntax highlighting.

> Shell commands in code blocks are prepended with a `$` (dollar sign and one blank character).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a code block includes command output, preprend the shell command with a `$ ` (dollar sign and one blank character).
```
